DEGRADATION MODELS OF HIGH 
PERFORMANCE POLYMERS
Abstract 
A review of methods and techniques used to predict the properties of: poly(aryletherketone)s 
(PAEKs), bismaleimide resisns (BMIs) and poly(etherimide) PEI as high performance polymers 
over time. These polymers, chosen for their resistance to high temperatures and pressures along 
with chemical inertness have found use in specialised areas of the oil and gas, automotive, 
aeronautical and healthcare industries. Understanding how these polymers degrade over time 
can have a big impact on their usefulness and long term cost. 

1.	Introduction
2.	Modelling and Analysis
2.1.	Standard Arrhenius modelling of degradation (Control/current standard) 
2.2.	Based on known/identified chemical mechanisms, used DFT/other computational 
methods to calculated activation energies / rates
2.2.1.	Limitations on size of molecules used
2.2.2.	Requires knowledge of specific reactions
2.2.3.	Combine values calculated for most impactful reactions to obtain an ‘overall’ 
degradation value and compare to accelerated data. 
2.2.4.	Calculate against initial repeat unit and modified (degraded) repeat units 
2.3.	Stochastic simulation of using rate of Chain Scission and Crosslinking which could inform 
prediction of mechanical properties. 
2.3.1.	Prediction of free volume from these simulations  Permeability
2.3.2.	Existing models?
3.	Experimental
3.1.	Degradation Conditions
3.1.1.	Thermal 
3.1.2.	Thermo-oxidative 
3.1.3.	Hot/Wet 
3.1.4.	H2S
3.1.5.	Hydrocarbon 
3.1.6.	Accelerated degradation (TGA)
3.1.6.1.	Separation of chemical degradation and thermal degradation
3.1.6.2.	Ramping and isothermal TGA experiments 
3.1.6.3.	Quantification of Diffusion Limited Oxidation processes
3.1.7.	Real-time degradation
3.1.7.1.	Temperature points at maximum use temperature and normal use 
temperature
4.	Analysis
4.1.	Chemical Analysis - Identify specific chemical reactions and their mechanisms under the 
environmental conditions
4.1.1.	Solid state NMR
4.1.2.	FTIR
4.1.3.	EPR
4.1.4.	XPS
4.2.	Morphology / Tertiary structure Measurements 
4.2.1.	XRD
4.2.2.	DSC
4.2.3.	GPC
4.3.	Predictive Measurements
4.3.1.	Permeability measurements 
4.3.2.	SEM / Optical Microscopy
4.3.2.1.	Track the formation of ‘micro cracks’ which may also impact permeability
5.	Extension
5.1.	Comparison to samples from the field
5.2.	Additional computational models based on access to higher computing power
5.2.1.	Refinement of stochastic models
5.3.	Model permeability of novel penetrants
6.	Conclusions
 
1.	INTRODUCTION
High performance polymers have found widespread use over the last 50 years, frequently as a 
replacement for metals in existing technologies. In such applications, these polymers offer 
reduced weight while offering similar or improved mechanical properties and often strong 
chemical resistance. While their use is increasing, especially within the aerospace industry, the 
high cost and manufacturing difficulties associated with them has hampered further adoption. 
There is no clear definition of what constitutes a ‘high performance’ polymer, as it is dependent on 
the application. However, commonly this category of materials has high long term durability at 
elevated temperatures (177oC, 10,000h) without significant loss of its mechanical properties and 
can withstand temperatures up to 450oC without experiencing rapid thermal decomposition. Such 
properties are achieved through a combination of chemical bonding forces and their structure 
frequently includes: high primary bond strength, a rigid aromatic backbone and, significant 
secondary bonding. For many commercially produced polymers, different grades are available 
based on the molecular weight achieved during synthesis. Lower molecular weights are used for 
improved processability while the highest molecular weight material has improved thermal 
resistance. 
[Diagram of Commercially available performance polymers]
Both thermoset and thermoplastic polymers find their most common application in the formation 
of composite materials. The addition of glass or carbon fibre to the polymer matrix the mechanical 
properties of the resulting material are improved. There is a significant body of work dealing with 
the manufacture, use and degradation of these composite materials. 
Long term use of these materials requires an understanding of how relevant properties change 
over the desired lifetime. The rate and mechanisms of degradation for a material vary heavily 
depending on the material and environment to which it is exposed. 
[Document layout and logic.] 
Mathematical modelling of these polymer systems can better our understanding of their behaviour 
and lifetimes under a wide range of conditions. Current predictive models widely used in industry 
use many simplifications to make calculations and experiments easier, cheaper and faster. 
However, through this simplification accuracy is sacrificed which, for the large extrapolations 
required, limits the effective predictive power of these models. Lifetime prediction relies on the 
extrapolation of accelerated degradation studies to predict the point at which the measured 
variable drops below acceptable limits. The chosen variable depends on the application under 
consideration for the polymer. Typically, for HTHP polymers, this is some mechanical property 
e.g. Elongation at break. 
DEGRADATION AND ITS MEASUREMENT
The degradation of a polymer can be caused by chemical, physical or mechanical environmental 
stresses.  
Chemical degradation involves any structural modification to the polymer’s backbone. This is the 
focus of most investigation, as the macroscale properties of the material are controlled by 
changes in the chemical structure.
The diffusion of chemical agents into the polymer can be a controlling factor in the rate of 
degradation. For many polymers, the diffusion of water into the sample is a good predictor of 
degradation due to hydrolysis.  
Physical degradation can cause changes in the mechanical properties of the polymer. Clearly this 
can become a concern in environments where the material could be cycled above and below the 
Tg frequently.
Mechanical ageing occurs through the loads and stresses applied to the material in use. This may 
occur secondary to chemical or physical ageing as the weakened material is no longer able to 
properly handle the mechanical stresses in its use case. 
There is little work in understanding how different mechanisms of degradation affect each other. 
PEEK
THERMAL DEGRADATION 
UV DEGRADATION 
 





 
